The Project Gutenberg eBook of Especially dance hall women
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Especially dance hall women

Author: Alma Ellerbe
        Paul Ellerbe

Release date: May 7, 2024 [eBook #73556]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: The Butterick Publishing Company, 1928

Credits: Roger Frank and Sue Clark


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESPECIALLY DANCE HALL WOMEN ***


A gold strike is likely to change a man’s viewpoint on many things ~


ESPECIALLY DANCE HALL WOMEN

By Alma and Paul Ellerbe


Long Jim Briggs wandered into Al’s Dance Hall one night when “Captain
Mac” was drunk and throwing things.

She had splendid deep red hair and a skin as white as blanched almonds,
and he admired her extravagantly. As a child admires a Christmas tree.
And differently, too--very differently. He had even given up
prospecting now and then and made good money as a carpenter so that he
could spend it on her. He had spent it all, and he knew her very well,
but he had never seen her drunk before. He had been in such places a
good deal, but he hadn’t got used to seeing women drunk. It hurt him.

He was about to wander on out again when he heard one of the other
girls say:

“She’s gonna pay for this all right! Al will make ’er come acrost with
the expenses of the whole damn’ place for a month for that big mirror
she broke!”

Long Jim hesitated and then started toward her. She took a saucer from
one of the little tables and sailed it like a clay pigeon. It curved
and hit him over the eye. The blood ran down his cheek and everybody
laughed. He wiped it away with his handkerchief and put his hand on her
arm just as she was going to throw another saucer.

“Why, Rosie--” he said reproachfully, in his soft, rumbling bass, and
stopped helplessly. His soft black eyes looked out kindly above his
soft brown mustache and his great soft brown beard, and said what his
tongue couldn’t find the words for.

Captain Mac was madder than she was drunk. All her sensations and her
thoughts were combined in one ache, like the ache in a tooth, and she
was biting upon it savagely and taking a kind of satisfaction in the
keen shoots of her pain. She could have knifed Al that night out of
hand and seen through stoically whatever might have come of it, but Jim
Briggs’ voice and his eyes were the kind of things she had forgotten
the existence of, and they slipped in under her guard and pierced the
quick of her.

She didn’t throw the other saucer, but suddenly Rosie Ellen McCarthy, a
decent Irish girl, looked out of her eyes and said with a flash of
passionate appeal--

“For God’s sake, Jim, take me out o’ this!”

Jim didn’t expect it. It touched him so deeply that he could only gulp
and nod his head. With his great height and bent shoulders and baggy
clothes he looked uncouth and awkward, standing beside painted, half
nude Captain Mac in her spangled dress. He looked around helplessly for
something to cover her shoulders with.

“This’ll do,” she said, stretching out her hand for a yellow scarf on
the top of a gilded upright piano.

She took it with one strong pull, slinging heedlessly along the floor
in a rain of broken bits half a dozen pieces of bric-a-brac that had
rested upon it.

Jim folded the gaudy stuff clumsily about her and took her by the arm
and started to go out, when Al came up and stood in front of him,
dapper, suave and touched with cynicism.

“There’s money owing me,” he said politely, “and she ain’t going
nowhere till it’s paid, see?”

The red surged into Jim’s cheeks, pale from working underground, and
his voice rose dangerously out of its soft rumble.

“There’s a hell of a lot more than money owing you, you God-forgotten
little skunk, and if you don’t get out o’ my way I’m liable to pay you
the part of it you ain’t lookin’ for!”

He kept his eye on the other’s hands and his muscles braced. If you
started things in Al’s place you finished them swiftly, or they
finished you.

The white hairy fingers twitched into the expected signal and Jim swung
the bony mass of his fist against Al’s ear as he would have swung a
pick into a stubborn conglomeration of quartz. But that was incidental.
He didn’t even notice where the little man rolled. Jerked forward by
Al’s signal, a very different antagonist was coming on the jump--Hard
Pan Schmitz, the dance hall bouncer.

Jim Briggs was no match for him and knew it. Almost as if he had
followed through the blow that sent Al spinning, he snatched up a heavy
lighted lamp, whirled it above his head and flung it. It struck
Schmitz’s raised forearm, smashed down his guard and covered him with
broken glass and burning oil.

In the stunned second before the racket began Jim took Rosie by the
wrist and broke through to the street. Behind them the place seethed
like an ants’ nest laid open by a spade.

He pulled her around the first corner. They pelted through the snow as
fast as she could run. He zigzagged his way through the town, taking
alleys when he could. They came at length to the door of a wooden shack
below the level of the sidewalk, on an unlighted street. Its unpainted
boards were warped, it listed heavily and, in common with all the other
houses in the block, it looked deserted. But Jim jumped down to it, key
in hand, and by the time Rosie had descended the rickety steps that led
from the sidewalk he had opened the door.

He shut it behind her, struck a match and led the way into a room
furnished with a stove, a camp cot, a chair and a small pine table with
a smoke blackened lamp on it. He lighted the lamp. Rosie fell into the
chair, breathing in big painful gulps. She wasn’t used to running. The
great altitude--ten thousand feet--had played havoc with her breath.
Jim had swung a pick there too long to be much affected. They looked at
each other in the dim light.

“It’s jest a place to sleep,” he said awkwardly. “Nobody knows I own
it. Feller gave it to me that struck it rich an’ went away. Mostly I’m
in the hills anyhow. So wouldn’t anybody look for us here.”

And then:

“The sheriff and the marshal’s both down on Al. If we can get away
without bein’ noticed, it ain’t likely anybody’ll foller.”

“Maybe it’d be safe for you to stay, then,” said Rosie, when she had
breath enough to say anything.

“Maybe. But I was aimin’ to go anyhow. Why don’t you go with me,
an’--an’ stay with me?”

She looked at him steadily.

“I ain’t fit.”

“You’re as fit as I am,” he said quietly, in the soft, rumbling,
reassuring bass that seemed kin to rivers and winds. “What d’you say to
a clean break an’ a new start together?” He lingered on the last word
wistfully. “I’ve been pretty lonesome, you know, a-knockin’ round from
one prospect hole to another an’ livin’ like a pack rat.”

She got up and came close and looked at him intently. The yellow piano
scarf that covered her befrizzled red head like an incongruous cowl and
clashed crudely with her red dress; her silver slippers, her spangles,
the bunch of cotton roses at her waist, her rouged cheeks and scarlet
lips and half-bared heaving breasts contrasted strangely with her
honest eyes.

“Do you want it for yourself, Jim?”

“For myself--more’n anything.”

“You’re not lying to me?”

“So help me God.”

He had expected her arms about his neck, but she gave him her hand like
a man.

“I’ll never let you down,” she said shortly. “Let’s go.”

They went out under a sky of faint, clean blue, where a frosty moon
queened it amidst a scattering of small pale stars, and found a man who
was driving out of town in a wagon and went with him.

By one means and another they made their way into the Gray Dome country
and Jim built a cabin there.

                 *       *       *       *       *

Fifteen years later, Rosie Briggs stood in the door of it and watched
Jim climb down the steep trail toward his latest prospect hole.

There was a fresh sprinkling of snow, so light and dry that the faint
wind started bits of it to rolling like feathers. Beneath it the smells
of spruce and pine and juniper and little silver mountain sage were
dormant. The cold, clean, thin air of early morning was stripped for
the odor of Long Jim’s pipe, and it drifted up, rank and acrid. Rosie
liked it, at that hour and in that place.

She watched him until he waved his hand far below like a tiny
marionette before he took the fork of the trail under the big Engelmann
spruce and disappeared for the day. She waved back and turned to her
tubs. Every week she washed the clothes of four families in Gray Dome,
the mining town down the main road just around the next bend. It was
hard work, but she didn’t mind it much.

She didn’t think about it. Besides, she only worked four days a week.
The other three she rested--sewed a little, crocheted a little, knit a
little--sweaters and stockings and mittens for Jim and herself, and
kept her diminutive house as clean as a chemist’s scales; or sat
quietly out in front in summer or inside by the stove in winter and let
the long waves of peace wash deeper and deeper in. Peace is good after
a life like Rosie’s. She lay in it thankfully, as in a bath, and soaked
old stains away.

On the side of Gray Dome Mountain, with the sheer drop of the cañon at
her feet and the range spread out beyond; in the midst of cleanness and
silence unbroken since that old rocky backbone of the continent thrust
itself up into the sun, she had risen slowly out of the shards of the
life of Captain Mac and come, late but surely, into her heritage of
womanliness and dignity. The years had chipped away her prettiness, but
in its place was beauty for those who could see it. The smooth face had
been sculptured into something fine and strong and self-directed,
something steadfast and serene. She wasn’t blown about by tantrums any
more.

She had a stake in the game of life now, and she played to hold it. She
had steadied to meet the responsibilities thrust upon her by Jim. He
was as kind and patient as the seasons, and as unreliable. And she was
like a cottonwood tree; she put out the leaves of her affection and
confidence surely and abundantly, but with tireless caution and she
rarely got nipped. She controlled him where he could be controlled, and
where he couldn’t she accepted him as she did the weather. Her
knowledge of men was empirical, unhampered by theories.

Jim would give anybody anything she had--he possessed nothing
himself--and be perennially surprized if she objected. Usually she
didn’t, but if it was something she wanted she went after it and got it
back if she could. Any bum or crook or sharper could win his friendship
and pick his mind or his pocket if either happened to have anything in
it.

But Rosie’s mind was her own, and instead of a pocket she used the
Conifer County Savings Bank. She met him at all points as shrewdly as
if he had been an opponent--which in a sense he was--but she loved him.
And she knew that he loved her, and counted on it, but only for what it
was worth.

She put more trust in his poverty. Every day, of course, he expected to
strike it. And for a while she had thought he might. But gradually as
the days lay themselves down in long, pleasantly monotonous rows until
the sum of them made many years, she came to know that he wouldn’t. And
that, far more than his love, was the foundation of her content. While
he was poor he was hers--wholly, unqualifiedly, unthinkingly hers.

Poor was scarcely the word, though. Jim lived in a moneyless world. Out
of the little she made she supplied the simple necessities of both of
them, and he was willing to wait for everything else until he struck
it. “Then--! Then--!” was what he thought of as he made his slow way up
and down the mountainside. To him the thought was roseate, luminous,
rejuvenescent.

But Rosie hated it. If for nothing else, because it held the seeds of
possible change. After a chancy life, she valued most, of things
attainable by human beings, a life that was free from chances.

On this morning in spring an eagle slanted down the sky on wide, still
wings; the ice broke up and tinkled in Little Cub Creek in the cañon;
the orange and yellow shoots of the willows swelled out toward catkins;
and Rosie washed her clothes contentedly, secure in the knowledge that
there was no “then”; while over in his hole in the side of Old Baldy
Jim broke up her world with quick excited blows of a short-handled
miner’s pick.

She was hanging out the clothes on the squawberry bushes at the back
when she heard the impatient crash of his elk hide boots. She went
quickly through the house and stopped in the front door at sight of
him.

When he swung up his heavy bag of samples for a signal, she knew. Knew
before she heard his whoop. And when it cut across the stillness like
the whistle of a locomotive it struck her cold. It chilled the core of
her spirit, as an icy wind loosed in the tropics would chill a naked
native.

“Struck it, by thunder! Two hundred dollars to the ton, if it’s worth a
cent! An’ the vein as plain as a layer ’o choc’late in a cake!”

He fell into a chair on the porch. Rosie stood and stared at him. The
one thing he knew was ore. He had the kind of knowledge that men had
been willing to pay for when he’d sell it. His “then” had come. The
realization went through her consciousness in widening rings. Whatever
else it meant, it meant the end of this; the beginning of uncertainty.

He caught her in his arms and swept her into the cabin and danced her
about until the place shook.

“Didn’t I tell you? Didn’t I say you’d ride in your own auto yet? It
had to come, old lady, it jest nacherally had to come!”

He gave her a hug and turned her loose.

“I knowed it,” he said solemnly. “I’ve allus knowed it. Away down deep
in there--” he tapped his breast--“I’ve had a hunch.”

He flung himself into a chair and looked at her hard. “‘Ain’t you
glad?” he said suddenly.

She was like a boat that has luffed into the wind. For a moment her
mental sails hung flapping. Then they filled and strained and she set
out before this new cold breeze. She told him as best she could that
she was glad.

“To look at you a feller might think you was kinder sorry like,” he
said quizzically. “What’s the matter?”

“I was thinkin’ a little about how happy we’d been right here--just you
and me and the house you made yourself.”

“’Twarn’t a patch on what it’s gonna be,” he said, and jumped up and
was off with his samples to the assayer’s in Gray Dome. He stepped
strongly, as a young man does. Half the stoop was gone from his
shoulders.

Rosie turned back slowly and sat down heavily at the kitchen table, her
occupation gone. Jim didn’t need a grubstaker now. She sat there a long
time, while memories of other miners who had got rich swarmed in her
brain like little devils that fell over each other in their eagerness
to stab her: Senator Sherrill, and Tom Potts, the hotel man, and Hooker
Bates, who took his flier in Wall Street; and Mike Watson, who divorced
his wife for Dora Schoonmaker, and a dozen others. They made their
money and then were gathered in by women like the Schoonmakers. She had
seen so many of them. They always left the women they had picked up
when they were poor. Especially dance hall women. Even when they were
their wives.

And she and Jim had never been married.

                 *       *       *       *       *

But Rosie Briggs wasn’t a quitter. Little in her life had gone by
default. When the terms of the sale of the mine had been arranged and
everybody in Conifer County knew that Jim was going to be a rich man,
she capped his plans with hers and squared about to meet what was
coming. She went over her clothes and spruced up as much as she could
to match her new station. And very carefully she laid down a program of
buying to be carried out as soon as the money came in.

Among her things she found a picture that she had clipped from a
fashion magazine twelve years ago--a colored picture of an
electric-blue plush dress of a style that she had admired. She felt a
twinge of sadness as she wondered how many other things that she had
wanted and gone without would look as queer as that now.

The dress she had worn when Jim took her out of the dance hall--the red
dress with the spangles on it--looked queerer, but that night while Jim
was in the village on an errand after supper she put it on and sat
waiting for him by the fire, determined to play such cards as she had.

When he came in he stopped at the door of the little sitting room with
a whistle of surprize.

“I ain’t seen that for ten years. Didn’t know you had it.”

“It isn’t much--” she said, smoothing the skirt.

She had lengthened and renovated it as best she could. It was the only
piece of finery she owned.

“It’s all right. Lord, how purty I uster think it was!”

The windows were open to the night. The weather had turned suddenly
warm that day, as if the old earth had decided to start life all over
again with the Briggses. There was a moon, and the new tender leaves of
the aspens about the cabin made patterns on it that twinkled. You could
almost feel the soft wooly anemones thrusting up their oval spear
points outside.

The feel of it all had got into Rosie’s heart and driven out some of
her fears. She even had her old banjo in her lap. She wanted to prove
to him that she meant to help him to be happy. She touched the strings
and began to sing.

She knew only the songs that had been popular a good while
ago--“Daisy”, “Two Little Girls in Blue”, “Sweet Rosie O’Grady” and one
or two more of the same sort. These, to her, were “music”--all there
was of it. She sang:

    “Daisy, Daisy, give me your answer true.
    I’m half crazy, just for the love of you . . .”

and felt a load slipping from her heart as the snow slips from the
summit of Gray Dome Mountain when warm weather comes.

“Gosh!” Jim murmured. “You ain’t sung that sence--”

He let the sentence die. His eyes smiled above his grizzling brown
mustache and beard. She wanted to put down the banjo and go to him and
touch his hand. But she went on singing, pleased that she remembered
the tune so well, that her voice rang out so clear and true, and Jim
came and sat close beside her.

A strange, deliciously sweet odor crept in under the smells of growing
things and wet earth out there on the dripping mountainside. She felt
just then that Jim was as steadfast and as sure to stand by as the huge
silver spruce that the cabin was built against. She let her cheek rest
on the shoulder of his coat.

    “It won’t be a stylish marriage,
    For I can’t afford a carriage . . .”

The odor came more strongly. It was like orange flowers. She smiled at
the sentimental notion. Orange flowers on the side of Gray Dome--

    “But you’d look sweet--upon the seat
    Of a bicycle built--”

The odor came from Jim’s coat.

It said suddenly, “Lorraine Schoonmaker,” as plainly as Jim’s lips
could have said it. To smell it was to see the girl standing behind the
counter in the Gray Dome Dry Goods Company’s store. Probably there was
no one in town who would have failed to connect her with that perfume.

A knife seemed to unfold inside of Rosie. It cut her song off in the
middle of the line and brought her upright in her chair with a gasp.

“What’s the matter?” Jim said, startled.

She got to her feet. She almost came straight out with it. That would
have been like her. It was what she wanted to do. But for the first
time in many years she was afraid. She stared at Jim with deep
revulsion. Suddenly he was part of an elemental horror that she had
climbed out of long ago and that now was closing around her again.

“I--I hadn’t ought to’ve sung that,” she said thickly. “It--makes me
think too much of the old days,” and went stumbling off to the bedroom.

He followed her and stood around, saying things to comfort her, and
finally she pretended that her mood had passed. But when she lay still
at last by his side and thought about Lorraine Schoonmaker, hard lines
pulled at the corners of her mouth that hadn’t been there for fifteen
years. Long after all traces of it had vanished, she fancied that the
air was faintly touched with the perfume of orange flowers.

“Women” would have been bad enough, but he would have tired of them and
come back. There’d be no coming back from this girl of twenty-one,
clever and hard of mind and soft and pink of body, with the first taste
of what money could do fresh in her mouth.

Men didn’t come back from the Schoonmaker women. Behind Lorraine, with
her sleek black pomaded hair, her short tight pussy-willow taffeta one
piece gown, her chiffon stockings and high-heeled satin pumps with
rhinestone buckles, her vanity case almost as big as a traveling bag,
her jeweled wrist watch and swinging bead girdle, Rosie saw Ally
Schoonmaker, her older sister, who had married Timothy Bund practically
on his death-bed for his house and his shares in the North Star Mine.
And behind Ally, up the ladder of the years a rung or two, Dora
Schoonmaker, breaking up the Watson home when Mike Watson’s mine began
to pay, and somehow juggling him into a divorce from the woman who had
seen him through the lean grim years of penury and into marriage with
her and then carrying him off East. And Effie, the oldest of the four,
who had run away with Perce Williams, nearly two decades her junior,
when he came into his father’s money, and held him grimly to her side
ever since.

Yes, and even Bertha Schoonmaker, the mother, with her wig and her
dirty chiffon blouses and her painted cheeks and brown teeth and
pink-lined hats with floating pink veils, playing the man-game still,
at sixty-four. Their lean, rapacious Schoonmaker hands were all alike.
If Lorraine took Jim, she’d take him to keep. At the altar. For very
definite financial ends of her own.

The tacit bargain between Long Jim and Rosie had never got itself into
words; they hadn’t felt the need of them. He had pulled her out of
hell. The strength of her allegiance to him couldn’t be increased by
the mere saying of words, however sacred, or the giving of a ring.
Marriage would have added nothing to her side of it. Nor, she had
thought, to his. She wished now that she had it, but it had not
occurred to her to wish it before. She had had something so much
solider in poverty. Marriage might hold and it might not, but while he
had been dependent upon her for his food and clothes, there had been no
doubt.

She went back to that over and over that night, seeing the placid years
in the little house as very beautiful through a mist of pain. She had a
feeling that, pulling at the almost forgotten cadences of the song, she
had brought the past down about her ears. She felt the old trapped
fatalistic despair and sick rage, without the old vigor. Something
began banking up inside of her, steadily, relentlessly. She was
terribly afraid of it. It seemed to her that it was a great bubble of
black blood in her brain, and that when it burst-- She tried to keep
from thinking to ease the strain on it, but her thoughts streamed out
swiftly from oubliettes in obscure corners of her mind.

They were hideous thoughts and really not hers at all. It seemed that
some devil sent them to torture her. The unfairness of it gagged in her
throat. She had fought her way out of filth and blackness to cleanness
and the sun, and now, without volition, the old horror came on her
again from within--clicked through her brain like yards and yards of
cinema film. The current of her life had swept past its one clean
tranquil place and was swirling along muddied and normal. The familiar
ache was in her heart, and Rosie was herself again--Captain Mac, of
Al’s Dance Hall. You didn’t get away from things like that.

Well, there were things that Captain Mac knew how to do that Rosie
Briggs had forgotten. She had whipped a can along the street once with
revolver bullets as a child whips a hoop to the admiration of every
idle man in town, and ended the demonstration by shooting a stranger’s
plug hat off his head without disturbing his hair. Her whirling
thoughts showed her Jim’s old .44 in the left-hand end of the bottom
drawer of the dresser.

She must wait, she told herself--and her heart gave a great bound--she
must wait until she had them together! She laughed out with sudden
raucous cruelty in the still cool night. Jim stirred in his sleep but
didn’t waken. She raised herself on one elbow and looked down at him,
while her thoughts raced and danced, piling themselves into the bubble.

And then it burst and left her weak with compassion, seeing them
together in her mind’s eye; seeing them as clearly as the daylight that
was climbing over Gray Dome Mountain. That fragile, empty, smart little
thing and Long Jim Briggs! Gaunt, weathered, grizzled old Jim--and her!
She’d no more be able to shoot than to enter into her dead mother’s
womb and be born again.

Feeling as old as the granite hills that ramparted the cañon, and with
something too of their plain ineluctable dignity, she arose and dressed
herself and built the breakfast fire in the stove.

When Jim came out to her she got slowly to her feet, closed the damper
and faced him.

“Jim,” she said, “that girl don’t want you. Take a good look at
yourself in the mirror over there, and then think of her. She’ll throw
you away like a sucked orange when the money’s gone.”

Long Jim Briggs stood up with his head in the rafters of the tiny room
and stared like an idiot.

“I smelled her perfumery on your coat,” said Rosie shortly, and
comprehension dawned slowly in his face.

“Holy jumping June bugs!” he said from somewhere down in his boots. “So
that’s what you thought! Wait a minute. I was hidin’ it in the wood
house. I wanted to surprize you.”

In a moment he returned with a package. With awkward swift movements he
ripped off the wrapping paper and shook out the folds of a brilliant
electric blue plush dress of a fashion fallen into forgotten desuetude
ten years before.

He displayed it pridefully down the front of his long person, head
a-cock and a twinkle in his eye.

“That’s all there was between us! Smell it!” The room reeked of orange
blossoms. “She made it for me nights, to make some extra money. It’s
the kind you kep’ a picture of from a fashion book. I got it off your
dresser. Do you--do you like it, Rosie?”

She tried to speak, but could only nod her head. He patted her shoulder
awkwardly. The dress swam before her eyes like a pane of blue glass in
the rain.

“It’s goin’ to be the swellest weddin’,” he said huskily, “that little
old Gray Dome ever seen. An’ then--” he cleared his throat with a
rumble like summer thunder--“we’re goin’ to Denver an’ buy a house on
Capitol Hill an’ the finest auto in town, an’ a nigger to run it an’
drive around an’ tell ’em all to go to hell!”


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the July 1, 1928 issue of
Adventure magazine.]






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESPECIALLY DANCE HALL WOMEN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

